---
title: "Activation of hippocampal CA2 region precedes CA3 following perforant-path stimulation and
internally-generated dentate spikes"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2019_CA2
excerpt: 'Cameron Wilhite, Russell S. Witte, Stephen L. Cowen'
date: 2019-12-11
venue: 'Society for Neuroscience Meeting'
slidesurl:
paperurl: /files/Sfn_2019_CA2_final.pdf
citation:
---

Abstract: Memory functions rely on precise signal processing through the entorhinal-hippocampal network, which
includes the entorhinal cortex (EC), dentate gyrus (DG), and hippocampus proper (CA1, CA2, CA3). Most
previous studies investigating signal transfer through this network have focused on the trisynaptic circuit
(EC -> DG -> CA3 -> CA1). Although the trisynaptic circuit and associated hippocampal regions (DG, CA3,
CA1) have been extensively studied, the role of CA2 in the processing of signals within the EC-hippocampal
network remains unclear in vivo. Here we used high-density silicon arrays to analyze evoked potentials and
large-scale network patterns across the dorsal hippocampus (DG, CA3, CA2, CA1) in anesthetized (n = 3)
and chronically implanted (n = 2) rats. In the anesthetized procedures, local-field potentials were acquired
in response to electrical stimulation of the medial entorhinal afferents to the hippocampus (medial
perforant-path). We found that the peak current source density (CSD) response in CA2 preceded the peak
response in CA3 (Student’s t-test, p < 1.2 e-15, n = 120 stimulations). Cross-correlation measures revealed
a > 2 ms lag between peak CSD responses in CA2 and CA3. Furthermore, the amplitude of the peak CSD in
CA2 was significantly greater than the peak CSD in CA3 (Student’s t-test, p < 2.2 e-15). Strong activation of
the hippocampus is also observed during rest in the form of dentate spikes, which are high-amplitude,
short-latency local-field responses thought to reflect coordinated EC input. We found that the peak CSD
response in CA2 preceded the peak response in CA3 during dentate spikes compared to both pre- and
post-dentate spike intervals (1-way ANOVA, p values < 3 e-4, n = 87 events). Cross-correlation measures
revealed a > 1 ms lag between peak CSD responses in CA2 and CA3. Moreover, the amplitude of the peak
CSD in CA2 was significantly greater than the peak CSD in CA3 during dentate spikes (Student’s t-test, p=
< 6 e-39). These results demonstrate a powerful transfer of signals from EC to hippocampal CA2 in vivo
that runs in parallel with the classical tri-synaptic circuit. These data suggest a key role of area CA2 in the
initial processing of cortical input within the EC-hippocampal memory network.
