---
title: "In vivo swine model for developing and validating acoustoelectric brain imaging of neuronal current"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2019_ABI
excerpt: 'Cameron Wilhite, Alexander Alvarez, Alex Burton, Chet Preston, Katalin Gothard, Andy Fuglevand, Debbie Mustacich, Stephen L. Cowen, Russell S. Witte'
date: 2019-11-11
venue: 'BRAIN Initiative/Society for Neuroscience Meetings'
slidesurl:
paperurl:
citation:
---

Abstract: Our long-term goal is to develop a noninvasive technique for electrical mapping of the human brain at higher resolution than EEG. Acoustoelectric brain imaging (ABI) uses a focused ultrasound beam to transiently modulate tissue resistivity and can be used to map current densities in 4D and at high spatial and temporal resolutions (millimeter, millisecond). This study describes a setup for developing and validating ABI in the somatosensory cortex of swine in vivo. Following craniotomy, the right or left snout was electrically stimulated (100 µs pulse at 0.5 Hz, 1-15 mA) using two, horizontally spaced needle electrodes (2-3 cm separation) while evoked activity across the contralateral rostrum somatosensory area was mapped with a 16-channel surface electrode array. The stimulating electrode pair was repeatedly inserted along the dorsoventral axis of the snout (1 cm increments, 5 sites) to create a somatotopic map of activation across the cortical rostrum area. We then integrated our custom ABI platform with ultrasound transducer (0.6 or 2.5 MHz) placed over somatosensory cortex to generate acoustoelectric signals during snout stimulation for current density reconstruction. Surface electrophysiological mappings revealed strong evoked potentials (0.2-0.9 mV peak) with short latency (15-20 ms to peak) that were spatially confined (5-55 mm2 FWHM) to the area of cortex represented by the receptive field of the stimulation site. Consistent with similar topographic studies, dorsal to ventral stimulation of the snout corresponded to a caudal to rostral progression of activation across the rostrum somatosensory cortex. In a separate experiment, evoked EEG signals were also detected across the skull and scalp. Using this model, we are capable of evoking robust, scalable, and spatially selective neuronal currents in pigs for quick and reliable in vivo testing of ABI in large animals. This initial study (n = 4 pigs) is an important step towards validating ABI for noninvasive, high-resolution electrical mapping of the human brain to help diagnose, monitor, and treat a variety of neurological conditions with electrophysiological signatures.
