---
title: "A locomotor rhythm organizes directional firing of neurons in the superior colliculus"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2023_SC
excerpt: 'Cameron Wilhite, Loren M. Frank, Massimo Scanziani'
date: 2023-11-11
venue: 'Society for Neuroscience/HHMI Science Meetings'
paperurl: 
citation: 
---

Abstract: Studies investigating the role of the superior colliculus (SC) in spatial orienting behavior have traditionally involved partially restrained animals performing orienting movements toward external stimuli. Accordingly, how neural activity in SC is organized during freely moving, internally driven behaviors is unknown. Here we record SC neurons in freely moving mice during a Y-maze spatial foraging task and identify neurons that preferentially fire during either left or right turns at the bifurcation of the maze. Remarkably, we show that a subset of these neurons fire rhythmically, in phase with a ~6 Hz left/right head oscillation that is characteristic of locomotion. Strikingly, a neuron’s turn direction preference on the Y-maze (i.e., selective firing during left or right turns) largely determines its preferred firing phase relative to the locomotor rhythm. During this preferred firing phase, the preferred turn direction of SC neurons matches the direction of the ongoing head oscillation. As a result, rhythmic neurons in SC that prefer opposite turn directions are segregated into two populations that fire during opposite phases/directions of the locomotor head rhythm. In summary, neural activity in mouse SC involves distinct populations whose firing alternates such as to represent rhythmic directional movements of the animal as it locomotes through space.
